---
title: 'Raspberry Pi home server project'
date: 2020-12-26
permalink: /posts/2020/12/RPi_home_server/
excerpt: "Detailed description of steps to build a wireless backup server."
tags:
  - Raspberry pi
  - Build
---
<div style="text-align: justify"> 
I usually spend my winter holidays visiting friends and family, but this is 2020. Finding myself with an excess of free time, I decided to build a wireless backup server, partly motivated by the difficulty my friend had in retreiving data from her laptop that failed to boot successfully after an update (Thank you, Microsoft). We recovered the data by removing the SSD from the laptop and inserting it into a hard disk enclosure. Retreiving data from my mac that way is impossible as the storage is soldered on to the motherboard (not to mention the difficulty in getting to the motherboard in the first place due to Apple's use of propreitary screws), so it is imperative that I backup my data regularly. While the mac has a feature dubbed 'Time machine' that performs an automated data backup at hourly intervals to a hard disk that is plugged in, I wouldn't be able to retrieve the data (if my mac stops working) and continue working on my backup (Windows) machine. Setting up a wireless backup server along with scripts to automatically backup the data should solve this problem. In this blog post, I describe the procedure I followed to set up the wireless backup server as well as the procedure to automate the data backup. 
</div>

## What you'll need:
* A Raspberry Pi computer. Though I used a [Raspberry Pi 3B+](https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-3-model-b-plus/ "Raspberry Pi 3B+"), I'd recommend using a [Raspberry Pi 4B](https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-4-model-b/ "Raspberry Pi 4B"). The 3B+ model only has USB 2.0 ports whereas the 4B model has USB 3.0 ports that offer faster data transfer. 
* A good power supply. Don't skimp on this, especially if you attach two hard disks for redundancy. I had multiple instances of the server crashing due to low voltage from the power supply until I plugged it into an outlet that pumps out 2.4 A at 5V DC through a USB port. Vendors typically sell the recommended power source that is rated for 2.5 A at 5V DC. The 4B model uses a USB-C port for power input and also has a recommended power source (sold separately).
* A microSD card, ideally larger than 16 GB. You *could* store all the data that you want to backup on the microSD card itself, in which case you'd need to get a microSD card with a large capacity such as [this](https://www.amazon.com/SanDisk-512GB-microSDXC-Memory-Adapter-dp-B08GXXKY6P/dp/B08GXXKY6P/ref=dp_ob_title_ce "SanDisk 512 GB microSD card") 512 GB card. I had a spare hard disk lying around, so I setup the server to use the hard disk to store the data. The instructions in this post are for servers that use a hard disk connected to the Raspberry Pi through the USB port. 


